---
title: Development
weight: 20
draft: true
---
## Welcome to MastroGPT

## Intro

MastroGPT is a product of Nuvolaris that enables the creation of your
own applications in a serverless environment. The environment is
connected to both the OpenAI API and the Nuv platform, which offer it as
a function as a service.

With MastroGPT, you can deploy your software based on Nuv entities
(packages, actions, activations…). Currently, we offer support for
Python, Node.js, Java, Go, and JavaScript runtimes. You can choose your
preferred language and build your own AI application.

## How to Start

MastroGPT, as mentioned earlier, offers developers everything they need
to build their own applications, with specific integrations for AI and
major cloud providers, a dedicated user interface, and a scalable
serverless platform. In particular, direct access to OpenAI is provided
(each environment has its own specific key) and is integrated
seamlessly.

The unique constraint is to place server side code under the `/packages`
folder and client side code under the `/web` folder. We’ll explain this
further in [Environment](/docs/development/environment).

## Getting Started with GitHub

If you’re new to the product and want to start with some examples to
better understand it, you can visit <https://github.com/mastrogpt> and
choose between starter templates or demo repositories. For example, you
can explore the python-starter repository
(<https://github.com/mastrogpt/python-starter>).

Here, you can explore source code, demos, and starters to better
understand capabilities and development possibilities.

Consider these templates as starting points to become familiar with Nuv
concepts and MastroGPT features.

## Start from Admin

Nuvolaris Admin is a fully integrated platform, linked to the Nuv
namespace (every user has one namespace in Nuv) and all features ready
to use. Its graphical interface makes the development process easy and
intuitive. To use it, you have to register on our login page
<https://nuvolaris.dev/>.

Every Admin feature is explained in
[Environment](#environment/index.adoc).
