---
title: Python
weight: 50
draft: true
---
## Creating and invoking Python actions

This document is still ðŸš§ **work in progress** ðŸš§

The process of creating Python actions is similar to that of [other
actions](#../../actions/index.adoc#the-basics). The following sections
guide you through creating and invoking a single Python action, and
demonstrate how to bundle multiple Python files and third party
dependencies.

An example action Python action is simply a top-level function. For
example, create a file called `hello.py` with the following source code:

    def main(args):
        name = args.get("name", "stranger")
        greeting = "Hello " + name + "!"
        print(greeting)
        return {"greeting": greeting}

An action supports not only a JSON object but also a JSON array as a
return value.

It would be a simple example that uses an array as a return value:

    def main(args):
        return ["a", "b"]

You can also create a sequence action with actions accepting an array
param and returning an array result.

You can easily figure out the parameters with the following example:

    def main(args):
        return args

Python actions always consume a dictionary and produce a dictionary. The
entry method for the action is `main` by default but may be specified
explicitly when creating the action with the `ops` CLI using `--main`,
as with any other action type.

You can create an OpenWhisk and OpenServerless action called
`helloPython` from this function as follows:

    ops action create helloPython hello.py

The CLI automatically infers the type of the action from the source file
extension. For `.py` source files, the action runs using a Python 3.6
runtime.

Action invocation is the same for Python actions as it is for any other
actions:

    ops action invoke --result helloPython --param name World

      {
          "greeting": "Hello World!"
      }

Find out more about parameters in the [Working with
parameters](./parameters.md) section.

# Packaging Python actions in zip files

You can package a Python action and dependent modules in a zip file. The
filename of the source file containing the entry point (e.g., `main`)
must be `__main__.py`. For example, to create an action with a helper
module called `helper.py`, first create an archive containing your
source files:

    zip -r helloPython.zip __main__.py helper.py

and then create the action:

    ops action create helloPython --kind python:3 helloPython.zip

# Packaging Python actions with a virtual environment in zip files

Another way of packaging Python dependencies is using a virtual
environment (`virtualenv`). This allows you to link additional packages
that may be installed via
[`pip`](https://packaging.python.org/installing/) for example. To ensure
compatibility with the OpenWhisk and OpenServerless container, package
installations inside a virtualenv must be done in the target
environment. So the docker image `openwhisk/python3action` should be
used to create a virtualenv directory for your action.

As with basic zip file support, the name of the source file containing
the main entry point must be `__main__.py`. In addition, the virtualenv
directory must be named `virtualenv`. Below is an example scenario for
installing dependencies, packaging them in a virtualenv, and creating a
compatible OpenWhisk and OpenServerless action.

1. Given a `requirements.txt` file that contains the `pip` modules and
    versions to install, run the following to install the dependencies
    and create a virtualenv using a compatible Docker image:

<!-- -->

    docker run --rm -v "$PWD:/tmp" openwhisk/python3action bash \
      -c "cd tmp && virtualenv virtualenv && source virtualenv/bin/activate && pip install -r requirements.txt"

1. Archive the virtualenv directory and any additional Python files:

<!-- -->

    zip -r helloPython.zip virtualenv __main__.py

1. Create the action:

<!-- -->

    ops action create helloPython --kind python:3 helloPython.zip

# Python 3 actions

Python 3 actions are executed using Python 3.6.1. This is the default
runtime for Python actions, unless you specify the `--kind` flag when
creating or updating an action. The following packages are available for
use by Python actions, in addition to the Python 3.6 standard libraries.

- aiohttp v1.3.3

- appdirs v1.4.3

- asn1crypto v0.21.1

- async-timeout v1.2.0

- attrs v16.3.0

- beautifulsoup4 v4.5.1

- cffi v1.9.1

- chardet v2.3.0

- click v6.7

- cryptography v1.8.1

- cssselect v1.0.1

- Flask v0.12

- gevent v1.2.1

- greenlet v0.4.12

- httplib2 v0.9.2

- idna v2.5

- itsdangerous v0.24

- Jinja2 v2.9.5

- kafka-python v1.3.1

- lxml v3.6.4

- MarkupSafe v1.0

- multidict v2.1.4

- packaging v16.8

- parsel v1.1.0

- pyasn1 v0.2.3

- pyasn1-modules v0.0.8

- pycparser v2.17

- PyDispatcher v2.0.5

- pyOpenSSL v16.2.0

- pyparsing v2.2.0

- python-dateutil v2.5.3

- queuelib v1.4.2

- requests v2.11.1

- Scrapy v1.1.2

- service-identity v16.0.0

- simplejson v3.8.2

- six v1.10.0

- Twisted v16.4.0

- w3lib v1.17.0

- Werkzeug v0.12

- yarl v0.9.8

- zope.interface v4.3.3
